README.md, before:

[![WordPress tested 6.1](https://img.shields.io/badge/WordPress-v6.1%20tested-0073aa.svg)](https://wordpress.org/plugins/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin) [![PHPCS WPCS](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHPCS-WordPress%20Coding%20Standards-8892BF.svg)](https://github.com/WordPress-Coding-Standards/WordPress-Coding-Standards) [![PHPUnit ](.github/coverage.svg)](https://brianhenryie.github.io/bh-wc-bitcoin-gateway/) [![PHPStan ](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHPStan-Level%208-2a5ea7.svg)](https://github.com/szepeviktor/phpstan-wordpress) 

# Bitcoin Gateway for WooCommerce

Self-custody Bitcoin payment gateway for WooCommerce. Bitcoin is paid directly into your wallet. Transactions are verified using public APIs. No private keys are stored on the server. No account is needed with any third party.

_The WooCommerce Bitcoin  gateway most philosophically aligned with WordPress and Bitcoin._

## Installation and Use

1. Download and install the latest version from [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/BrianHenryIE/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin/releases/). In the admin dashboard under WooCommerce/Settings/Payments you should now see the payment option listed:

![WooCommerce Payment Gateways list](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-1.png "Once the plugin is active, the gateway will be visible in the WooCommerce Payment Gateways list")

2. From your Bitcoin wallet, copy your "Master Public Key". It should start with `xpub`, `zpub` or `ypub` and then a long alphanumeric string.

<details>
<summary>E.g. Electrum Bitcoin Wallet</summary>

For [Electrum Bitcoin Wallet](https://electrum.org/), it's in the menu under `Wallet`/`Infromation`:

![Electrum Wallet Information Screen](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-2.png "Copy xpub or zpub etc from here")

</details>

3. Paste that into the payment gateway settings screen and save:

![WooCommerce Bitcoin Gateway settings screen](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-3.png "Paste your xpub into the WooCommerce settings")

4. You will now be able to add an item to your cart, head to the checkout and see the Bitcoin payment option.

![Gateway visible on checkout](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-4.png "The gateway will be available at customer checkout")

5. When an order is placed, a derived payment address is tied to this order and will not be reused. After checkout, this is what the customer will see:

![WooCommerce order thank you page](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-5.png "The thank you page shows the payment instructions")

* The QR code can be scanned or clicked, and contains the address and amount
* "Payment Address" and "Payment Total" are both links which copy the value to the clipboard
* "Last Checked" is a link which queries the blockchain for new transactions
* A background check runs every five minutes as long as the order remains on-hold
* The customer can view the same payment instructions under `my-account/orders/123`

6. In the WooCommerce admin order UI, the Bitcoin details are visible in a metabox:

![Order metabox](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-6.png "Bitcoin address, amount paid, etc. visible on order UI")

7. WooCommerce's Action Scheduler regularly checks unpaid Bitcoin orders' addresses for new transactions, logs those transactions in the order notes, and marks the orders as paid once the expected amount of Bitcoin has been received.

## Notes

### Custom Post Types

Payment addresses are saved as a custom post type and their status can be seen in a standard WordPress list table:

![Addresses List Table](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-7.png "Standard WordPress list table show addresses and their status and properties: related order, number of transactions, balance, derivation path, last modified date.")

Similarly, wallet addresses (xpubs / master public keys) are saved as a custom post type.

### Templates

All customer and admin UIs can be easily overridden using the standard WooCommerce templating system. 

### PHP Requirements

This plugin uses [Bit-Wasp/bitcoin-php](https://github.com/Bit-Wasp/bitcoin-php) to derive Bitcoin payment addresses on your server. This requires PHP's BC Math, Mcrypt and GMP extensions. The former two are provided by polyfill libraries, [phpseclib/bcmath_compat](https://github.com/phpseclib/bcmath_compat) and [phpseclib/mcrypt_compat](https://github.com/phpseclib/mcrypt_compat). The latter may be a problem if it is not installed on your server. You can check using `php -m | grep gmp`.

### APIs

Exchange rate:

* [Bitfinex](https://www.bitfinex.com/) - [API](https://docs.bitfinex.com/docs) - default
* [BitStamp](https://www.bitstamp.net/) - [API](https://www.bitstamp.net/api/) - implemented but not in use

Transactions:

* [SoChain](https://www.sochain.com/) - [API](https://sochain.com/api/) - default
* [Blockchain.com](https://blockchain.com) - [API](https://www.blockchain.com/api) - implemented but not in use
* [Blockstream.info](https://blockstream.info/) - [API](https://github.com/Blockstream/esplora/blob/master/API.md) - implemented but not in use

### Syncing received payments with wallets

Wallets only check a set number of derived addresses for payments and orders may be assigned an address outside the list your wallet is checking. If your store reports a payment has been received, you may need to configure your wallet to look at more addresses.

<details>
<summary>E.g. Electrum Bitcoin Wallet</summary>

In the case of Electrum, in the menu choose `View`/`Show Console`, visit the `Console` tab, and set the lookahead value by typing the following:
```
wallet.change_gap_limit(200)
wallet.synchronize()
```
See: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/63641/how-to-list-all-the-hd-address-in-electrum

</details>

## TODO

* Num-confirmations required, e.g. for zero-conf payments (e.g. virtual products)
* Unpaid order expiry
* Partial payment email
* Show transactions in meta box on order page
* API round-robin and failover
* Tor
* Units: Add mbtc as well as sats etc. (to match default Electrum display settings)
* Zero-conf: to avoid the threat of fraud where the fee is low-balled, only accept zero-conf transactions whose fees are above recent expected range
* Run contract tests to find what currencies are supported by the Exchange_Rate APIs
* 100% WPCS and PhpStan
* WooCommerce Blocks checkout
* Update screenshots + use mobile view for customer screenshots

## How You Can Help

* Directions and screenshots showing how to find xpub in various wallets

See [BrianHenryIE/WordPress-Plugin-Boilerplate](https://github.com/BrianHenryIE/WordPress-Plugin-Boilerplate) for project setup rationale. 

## Motivation and Alternatives 

Most existing solutions (see [WordPress.org plugin repo](https://wordpress.org/plugins/search/Bitcoin/)) suffer from one of the following:

* **Non-custodial wallet**. Funds are sent to a wallet managed by another company, which carries the risk of you losing funds due to their security incidents (unfortunately not uncommon), and gives them full view of your financial transactions.
* **Sign-up required**. Many plugins are written to encourage the use of a particular API and this often requires signing up for an account with a third party who should be unconnected to your financial transactions.
* **Profit motivated**. The purpose is often to upsell merchants to currency exchange services, or to charge a transaction fee for the use of the "free" plugin. 

I would like to acknowledge plugins similar to this one, who do not have any of those flaws:

* Sovereign Crypto Payments by OnionBazaar – [wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/plugins/sovereign-crypto-payments/) | [github](https://github.com/onionbazaar/sovereign-crypto-payments)
* Nomiddleman Bitcoin and Crypto Payments for WooCommerce – [wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/plugins/nomiddleman-crypto-payments-for-woocommerce/) | [github](https://github.com/nomiddleman/nomiddleman-woocommerce/)
* Accept Bitcoin by Bitonymous – [wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/plugins/accept-bitcoin)

WooCommerce are themselves (officially) encouraging the use of crypto (see [It’s Time to Start Accepting Cryptocurrency](https://woocommerce.com/posts/start-accepting-cryptocurrency/), woocommerce.com, 2022-11-02) but the [plugins listed on their site](https://woocommerce.com/cryptocurrency/) are all by venture-capital backed companies.

To use one of those plugins is to eschew Bitcoin's fundamental quality of being a peer-to-peer network.

They are also contrary to WordPress's "open" philisophy. Using this plugin does not preclude you from using the services of any company, and it does not restrict or commit you to any company.

# Acknowledgements

This plugin is forked from [Nullcorps/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin](https://github.com/Nullcorps/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin) who figured out all the core functionality, i.e. the address generation, exchange rates, payment confirmations – everything Bitcoin related. The work here has been to implement that as a modern WordPress/WooCommerce plugin with Action Scheduler, CPTs, Composer, automated tests, WPCS, etc. Thank you, [NullCorps](https://github.com/Nullcorps)!

> I think this stuff below is correct, but idk.
>
> It's free, go nuts. I'm just sticking things together to make stuff.
>
> – _Nullcorps_

Big thank you to [@orionwl](https://twitter.com/orionwl) for talking things through along the way and patiently explaining the maths side of it over and over till I get it :) – _Nullcorps_

Commit message:

Add admin notice when GMP extension is missing

README.md, after:

[![WordPress tested 6.1](https://img.shields.io/badge/WordPress-v6.1%20tested-0073aa.svg)](https://wordpress.org/plugins/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin) [![PHPCS WPCS](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHPCS-WordPress%20Coding%20Standards-8892BF.svg)](https://github.com/WordPress-Coding-Standards/WordPress-Coding-Standards) [![PHPUnit ](.github/coverage.svg)](https://brianhenryie.github.io/bh-wc-bitcoin-gateway/) [![PHPStan ](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHPStan-Level%208-2a5ea7.svg)](https://github.com/szepeviktor/phpstan-wordpress) 

# Bitcoin Gateway for WooCommerce

Self-custody Bitcoin payment gateway for WooCommerce. Bitcoin is paid directly into your wallet. Transactions are verified using public APIs. No private keys are stored on the server. No account is needed with any third party.

_The WooCommerce Bitcoin  gateway most philosophically aligned with WordPress and Bitcoin._

## Installation and Use

1. Download and install the latest version from [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/BrianHenryIE/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin/releases/). In the admin dashboard under WooCommerce/Settings/Payments you should now see the payment option listed:

![WooCommerce Payment Gateways list](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-1.png "Once the plugin is active, the gateway will be visible in the WooCommerce Payment Gateways list")

2. From your Bitcoin wallet, copy your "Master Public Key". It should start with `xpub`, `zpub` or `ypub` and then a long alphanumeric string.

<details>
<summary>E.g. Electrum Bitcoin Wallet</summary>

For [Electrum Bitcoin Wallet](https://electrum.org/), it's in the menu under `Wallet`/`Infromation`:

![Electrum Wallet Information Screen](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-2.png "Copy xpub or zpub etc from here")

</details>

3. Paste that into the payment gateway settings screen and save:

![WooCommerce Bitcoin Gateway settings screen](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-3.png "Paste your xpub into the WooCommerce settings")

4. You will now be able to add an item to your cart, head to the checkout and see the Bitcoin payment option.

![Gateway visible on checkout](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-4.png "The gateway will be available at customer checkout")

5. When an order is placed, a derived payment address is tied to this order and will not be reused. After checkout, this is what the customer will see:

![WooCommerce order thank you page](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-5.png "The thank you page shows the payment instructions")

* The QR code can be scanned or clicked, and contains the address and amount
* "Payment Address" and "Payment Total" are both links which copy the value to the clipboard
* "Last Checked" is a link which queries the blockchain for new transactions
* A background check runs every five minutes as long as the order remains on-hold
* The customer can view the same payment instructions under `my-account/orders/123`

6. In the WooCommerce admin order UI, the Bitcoin details are visible in a metabox:

![Order metabox](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-6.png "Bitcoin address, amount paid, etc. visible on order UI")

7. WooCommerce's Action Scheduler regularly checks unpaid Bitcoin orders' addresses for new transactions, logs those transactions in the order notes, and marks the orders as paid once the expected amount of Bitcoin has been received.

## Notes

### Custom Post Types

Payment addresses are saved as a custom post type and their status can be seen in a standard WordPress list table:

![Addresses List Table](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-7.png "Standard WordPress list table show addresses and their status and properties: related order, number of transactions, balance, derivation path, last modified date.")

Similarly, wallet addresses (xpubs / master public keys) are saved as a custom post type.

### Templates

All customer and admin UIs can be easily overridden using the standard WooCommerce templating system. 

### PHP Requirements

This plugin uses [Bit-Wasp/bitcoin-php](https://github.com/Bit-Wasp/bitcoin-php) to derive Bitcoin payment addresses on your server. This requires PHP's BC Math, Mcrypt and GMP extensions. The former two are provided by polyfill libraries, [phpseclib/bcmath_compat](https://github.com/phpseclib/bcmath_compat) and [phpseclib/mcrypt_compat](https://github.com/phpseclib/mcrypt_compat). If the [GMP extension](https://www.php.net/manual/en/book.gmp.php) is not installed on your server, the gateway will not be added to WooCommerce and an admin notice will be displayed explaining why.

![Missing dependency admin notice](./.wordpress-org/screenshot-8.png "Admin notice when required PHP GMP library is unavailable")

### APIs

Exchange rate:

* [Bitfinex](https://www.bitfinex.com/) - [API](https://docs.bitfinex.com/docs) - default
* [BitStamp](https://www.bitstamp.net/) - [API](https://www.bitstamp.net/api/) - implemented but not in use

Transactions:

* [SoChain](https://www.sochain.com/) - [API](https://sochain.com/api/) - default
* [Blockchain.com](https://blockchain.com) - [API](https://www.blockchain.com/api) - implemented but not in use
* [Blockstream.info](https://blockstream.info/) - [API](https://github.com/Blockstream/esplora/blob/master/API.md) - implemented but not in use

### Syncing received payments with wallets

Wallets only check a set number of derived addresses for payments and orders may be assigned an address outside the list your wallet is checking. If your store reports a payment has been received, you may need to configure your wallet to look at more addresses.

<details>
<summary>E.g. Electrum Bitcoin Wallet</summary>

In the case of Electrum, in the menu choose `View`/`Show Console`, visit the `Console` tab, and set the lookahead value by typing the following:
```
wallet.change_gap_limit(200)
wallet.synchronize()
```
See: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/63641/how-to-list-all-the-hd-address-in-electrum

</details>

## TODO

* Num-confirmations required, e.g. for zero-conf payments (e.g. virtual products)
* Unpaid order expiry
* Partial payment email
* Show transactions in meta box on order page
* API round-robin and failover
* Tor
* Units: Add mbtc as well as sats etc. (to match default Electrum display settings)
* Zero-conf: to avoid the threat of fraud where the fee is low-balled, only accept zero-conf transactions whose fees are above recent expected range
* Run contract tests to find what currencies are supported by the Exchange_Rate APIs
* 100% WPCS and PhpStan
* WooCommerce Blocks checkout
* Update screenshots + use mobile view for customer screenshots

## How You Can Help

* Directions and screenshots showing how to find xpub in various wallets

See [BrianHenryIE/WordPress-Plugin-Boilerplate](https://github.com/BrianHenryIE/WordPress-Plugin-Boilerplate) for project setup rationale. 

## Motivation and Alternatives 

Most existing solutions (see [WordPress.org plugin repo](https://wordpress.org/plugins/search/Bitcoin/)) suffer from one of the following:

* **Non-custodial wallet**. Funds are sent to a wallet managed by another company, which carries the risk of you losing funds due to their security incidents (unfortunately not uncommon), and gives them full view of your financial transactions.
* **Sign-up required**. Many plugins are written to encourage the use of a particular API and this often requires signing up for an account with a third party who should be unconnected to your financial transactions.
* **Profit motivated**. The purpose is often to upsell merchants to currency exchange services, or to charge a transaction fee for the use of the "free" plugin. 

I would like to acknowledge plugins similar to this one, who do not have any of those flaws:

* Sovereign Crypto Payments by OnionBazaar – [wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/plugins/sovereign-crypto-payments/) | [github](https://github.com/onionbazaar/sovereign-crypto-payments)
* Nomiddleman Bitcoin and Crypto Payments for WooCommerce – [wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/plugins/nomiddleman-crypto-payments-for-woocommerce/) | [github](https://github.com/nomiddleman/nomiddleman-woocommerce/)
* Accept Bitcoin by Bitonymous – [wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/plugins/accept-bitcoin)

WooCommerce are themselves (officially) encouraging the use of crypto (see [It’s Time to Start Accepting Cryptocurrency](https://woocommerce.com/posts/start-accepting-cryptocurrency/), woocommerce.com, 2022-11-02) but the [plugins listed on their site](https://woocommerce.com/cryptocurrency/) are all by venture-capital backed companies.

To use one of those plugins is to eschew Bitcoin's fundamental quality of being a peer-to-peer network.

They are also contrary to WordPress's "open" philisophy. Using this plugin does not preclude you from using the services of any company, and it does not restrict or commit you to any company.

# Acknowledgements

This plugin is forked from [Nullcorps/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin](https://github.com/Nullcorps/woocommerce-gateway-bitcoin) who figured out all the core functionality, i.e. the address generation, exchange rates, payment confirmations – everything Bitcoin related. The work here has been to implement that as a modern WordPress/WooCommerce plugin with Action Scheduler, CPTs, Composer, automated tests, WPCS, etc. Thank you, [NullCorps](https://github.com/Nullcorps)!

> I think this stuff below is correct, but idk.
>
> It's free, go nuts. I'm just sticking things together to make stuff.
>
> – _Nullcorps_

Big thank you to [@orionwl](https://twitter.com/orionwl) for talking things through along the way and patiently explaining the maths side of it over and over till I get it :) – _Nullcorps_
